I think it is clear that it would be better if the editor kept in memory only the data it needs to display, for example only 100-150 lines of text currently visible on the screen. When the user scrolls vertically or horizontally new chunks of text would be loaded asynchronously in front of the viewport and those left behind are freed or simple overwritten by the new data. It is as if you'd wonder in the dark with a hanging lantern.

To clarify, I assume a few things here:
- the height of each line is the same
- the widths of characters are varying to an unknown extent
- the text is in variable-length encoding
- the file that needs to be displayed is a square-shaped wall of text and is extremely large (at least tens of gigabytes)
- the file storage is expected to have medium latency for continuous reads and an absurdly high latency for random reads

So, how would it be possible to load/read only precisely the stuff that I need? I mean, when, for example, the user moves the viewport from the top-left corner of the text bounding box to the bottom-right corner the text that is supposed to be there is not in memory. It needs to be loaded from the disk. The issue is, there may be many gigabytes of data between each line, so I'd prefer to read only the spans that will contain the text that will be displayed. In other words, I don't have an option of reading each line inside the viewport from the beginning until I find the first character that would be visible, because the font is not monospaced.

My idea for now is to have some sort of 2D binary tree where each leaf would occupy a constant area of the viewport and contain an array of spans into the actual file so that the characters in those spans would cover the leaf. The data in these spans can be cached in a pool because they would be the same size.

Also the tree needs to be easily expanded in two directions. The cells will cover area that actually has text in it, so the tree will look like a vertical bar chart rotated by 90 degrees. Another thing is that only part of the tree may need to be present in memory.

I think this fits into 3 arrays:
- Quadtree node array
- Span array
- Text array

Known variables:
- Visual height of a line
- Visual size of a quadtree leaf node (a multiple of LHs)

Where

```c
struct QuadTreeNode {
    uint32_t parent; // needed for neighbour quad access
    uint32_t children[4];
    // length is calculated from size of a node
    // empty entries are OK
    uint32_t span_array_offset;
}

struct Span {
    void *ptr;
    uint64_t size;
}

struct PinnedTextChunk {
    uint64_t size, cap;
    PinnedTextChunk *prev;
    uint8_t data[1];
}
```

Nodes and spans are stored in relocatable contiguous arrays.

When a new chunk is read, the editor must update quad spans, extend and/or deepen the tree and mark all quads currently visible on the screen as "dirty". Then UI will request only those quads and repaint the screen. The only question is how to know what quads to update. I may need to keep track of a quad with the last character in the file.

Also a non-leaf quad has to have a way of indicating that it contains text without having any children.

What should happen when a few lines are deleted in the middle of a file but only quads in the center are loaded?